Rubie gateway connection status design history (#505)
NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history: app/manage-breast-screening/2026/06/informing-users-about-the-gateway-connection-status/index.md

---
title: Informing users about the gateway connection status
description: Creating connection status messages and steps to follow when things are broken
date: 2026-06-09
author: Danny Chadburn
opengraphImage:
  src: /manage-breast-screening/2026/05/image-reading-session-overview/added-to-worklist.png
  alt: A green tick with a message indicating that the system is working as it should be.
tags:
  - beta
  - prototype
  - breast screening
---

We've been looking into how to let users know if the connection between our service and the machines used in mammography rooms is working as it should be, and what to do if it's not.

## Getting technology talking

Our team of developers have been busily building the [Rubie](/breast-screening-pathway/2026/05/naming-new-breast-screening-service/) gateway, a technology that will perform a crucial role in our service.

> It allows the transfer of participant details and mammogram images between our system and the imaging machines in breast screening units (BSUs).

Reviewer: This somewhat reads like we're transferring mammogram images _to_ the imaging machines.

Author: ```suggestion
It allows the efficient transfer of data between the imaging machines in breast screening units (BSUs) and our service. That means we can send things like appointment statuses, and receive back details of mammogram images and any other associated info.
```

The general plan is:

* when a user starts (or resumes) an appointment on our service, the gateway adds the participant details to a 'worklist'
* the worklist syncs with the modality machine(s) at the BSU, showing which participants are ready to be scanned
* the mammographer selects the person from the modality worklist, and begins taking images
* as soon as the first image has been taken, the gateway starts sending image data to our service
* information is transferred live, so image thumbnails and any associated metadata will display on our service almost instantly
* once the appointment is complete (either fully concluded or prematurely stopped), the gateway tells the modality machine that the participant can be removed from the worklist

### Improvements to the current setup

Our aim is for the gateway to automate various manual processes.

> BSUs typically export and upload their daily clinic lists from NBSS to a shared worklist on their Radiology Information System (RIS). This worklist can be viewed on local modality machines.

Reviewer: Query - is the worklist part of the RIS, or is it a separate thing?

Author: ```suggestion
BSUs typically export and upload their daily clinic lists from NBSS to a shared worklist on their Radiology Information System (RIS). This worklist is then synced to local modality machines where it can be viewed.
```
